*(This article originally appeared on freeCodeCamp / Medium.com, in
February 2017.)*

It’s [public
knowledge](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/7/204032-why-google-stores-billions-of-lines-of-code-in-a-single-repository/fulltext) that
Google uses a single repository to share code — all 2 billion lines of
it — and that it uses the trunk-based development paradigm.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_3hPZNDocbp68XsbsJoZ-iQ.jpg" title="1_3hPZNDocbp68XsbsJoZ-iQ.jpg" width="370" height="235" alt="1 3hPZNDocbp68XsbsJoZ iQ" />

*(This is easily one of the largest single code repositories in the
world. [Source](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/7/204032-why-google-stores-billions-of-lines-of-code-in-a-single-repository/fulltext).)*

This is easily one of the largest single code repositories in the
world. Source. For many developers outside the company, this is
surprising and counterintuitive, but it works really well. (The article
linked above gives good examples, so I won’t repeat them here.)

> Google’s codebase is shared by more than 25,000 Google software
> developers from dozens of offices in countries around the world. On a
> typical workday, they commit 16,000 changes to the codebase. (
>
> [source](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/7/204032-why-google-stores-billions-of-lines-of-code-in-a-single-repository/fulltext)
>
> )

This article is about the specifics of building an open source web
framework ([AngularDart](https://webdev.dartlang.org/angular)) in this
context.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_42xyxKFKI9a0j0BWuHGIHg-1.jpg" title="1_42xyxKFKI9a0j0BWuHGIHg.jpg" width="598" height="351" alt="1 42xyxKFKI9a0j0BWuHGIHg" />

*(‘Human users’ means software engineers committing code at Google. (As
opposed to source generation
tools.) [Source](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/7/204032-why-google-stores-billions-of-lines-of-code-in-a-single-repository/fulltext).)*

Only one version
----------------

When you employ trunk-based development in a single huge repo, you have
only one version of everything. That’s kind of obvious. It’s still good
to point it out here, though, because it means that — at Google — you
can’t have app FooBar that’s using AngularDart 2.2.1 and another app
BarFoo that’s on 2.3.0. Both apps must be on the same version — the
latest one.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/0_vdQqatZdTxZ9CUDs.png" title="0_vdQqatZdTxZ9CUDs.png" width="597" height="179" alt="0 vdQqatZdTxZ9CUDs" /> 

*(Illustrative image taken
from [trunkbaseddevelopment.com](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/).)*

That’s why Googlers sometimes say that all software at Google lives on
the bleeding edge.

If your entire soul screams ‘dangerous!’ right now, that’s
understandable. Depending on the trunk (‘master’ in git terminology) of
a library with your production code sure sounds dangerous. But there’s a
plot twist ahead.

74 thousand tests per commit
----------------------------

AngularDart defines 1601 tests
([here](https://github.com/dart-lang/angular2/tree/master/test)). But
when you’re committing a change to AngularDart code in the Google
repository, it also runs tests for *everyone at Google who depends on
the framework*. At the moment, that’s about 74 thousand tests (depending
on how big your change is — a heuristic skips tests that the system
knows you’re not affecting).

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_5VjjBOiVq74495vLAKctOg.png" title="1_5VjjBOiVq74495vLAKctOg.png" width="600" height="371" alt="1 5VjjBOiVq74495vLAKctOg" />
It’s good to have more tests.

I just made a change that only manifests itself 5% of the time,
simulating something like a race condition in the change detection
reinsertion verification algorithm (I
added `&& random.nextDouble() > .05` to [this if
statement](https://github.com/dart-lang/angular2/blob/v2.1.0/lib/src/core/change_detection/differs/default_iterable_differ.dart#L386)).
It did not manifest in any of the 1601 tests when I ran them (once). But
it did break a bunch of client tests.

The real value here, though, is that those are tests of *actual apps*.
Not only are they numerous, they’re also reflecting how the framework is
used by developers (not just the framework authors). This is
significant: framework owners don’t always correctly estimate how their
framework is being used.

It also helps that those apps are in production, and billions of dollars
flow through them each month. There’s a big difference between demo apps
that a framework author puts together in his spare time, and real
production apps with tens or hundreds of person-years invested in them.
If the web is to be relevant in the future, we need to better support
development of the latter.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_DrJBfzzSTkGdmrlu6OnYfA.png" title="1_DrJBfzzSTkGdmrlu6OnYfA.png" width="597" height="245" alt="1 DrJBfzzSTkGdmrlu6OnYfA" />

So what happens if the framework breaks some of the apps that are built
on it?

You break it, you fix it
------------------------

When AngularDart authors want to introduce a breaking change, *they have
to go and fix it for their users*. Since everything at Google lives in a
single repo, it’s trivial to find out whom they’re breaking, and they
can start fixing right away.

Any breaking change to AngularDart also includes all the fixes to that
change in all the Google apps that depend on it. So the breakage and the
fix go into the repo simultaneously and — of course — after proper code
review by all affected parties.

Let’s give a concrete example. When someone from the AngularDart team
makes a change that affects code in the AdWords app, they go to that
app’s source code and fix it. They can run AdWords’ existing tests in
the process, and they can add new ones. Then, they put all of that into
their change list and ask for review. Since their change list touches
code in both the AngularDart repo and the AdWords repo, the system
automatically requires code review approval from both of those teams.
Only then can the change be submitted.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_kbwhvH4lz1B-jRHBCEvAcA.png" title="1_kbwhvH4lz1B-jRHBCEvAcA.png" width="598" height="443" alt="1 kbwhvH4lz1B jRHBCEvAcA" />
This has the obvious effect of preventing framework development in a
vacuum. AngularDart framework developers have access to millions of
lines of code that are built with their platform, and they regularly
touch that code themselves. They don’t need to assume how their
framework is used. (The obvious caveat is that they only see the Google
code and not the code of all the Workivas, Wrikes and StableKernels of
the world that also use AngularDart.)

Having to upgrade your users’ code also slows development down. Not as
much as you may think (look at AngularDart’s progress since October),
but it still slows things down. That’s both good and bad, depending on
what you want from a framework. We’ll get back to that.

Anyway. The next time someone at Google says that an alpha version of
some library is stable and in production, now you know why.

Large scale changes
-------------------

What if AngularDart needs to make a major breaking change (say, going
from 2.x to 3.0) and that change breaks 74 thousand tests? Will the team
go and fix all of them? Will they make changes to *thousands* of source
files, most of which they haven’t authored?

Yes.

One of the cool things about having a [sound type
system](https://dart.dev/guides/language/type-system) is that your
tooling can be much more useful. In sound Dart, tools can be sure that a
variable is of a certain type, for example. For refactoring, that means
that many changes can be completely automatic, with no need of
confirmation from the developer.

When a method on class Foo changes from bar() to baz(), you can create a
tool that goes through the entirety of the single Google repository,
finds all instances of *that* Foo class and its subclasses, and changes
all mentions of bar() to baz(). With Dart’s sound type system, you can
be sure this won’t break anything. Without sound types, even such a
simple change can get you in trouble.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_yxqdl9CBoB48XG0avf4piQ.gif" title="1_yxqdl9CBoB48XG0avf4piQ.gif" width="500" height="549" alt="1 yxqdl9CBoB48XG0avf4piQ" />

*(One keystroke and your code is formatted according to Dart [style
guide](https://www.dartlang.org/guides/language/effective-dart/style#formatting).
In fact, the guide states: “The official whitespace-handling rules for
Dart are **whatever dart\_style produces**.”)*

Another thing that helps with large scale changes
is [dart\_style](https://github.com/dart-lang/dart_style), Dart’s
default formatter. All Dart code at Google is formatted using this tool.
By the time your code reaches reviewers, it has been auto-formatted
using dart\_style, so there are no arguments about whether to put the
newline here or there. And that applies to large scale refactors as
well.

Performance metrics
-------------------

As I said above, AngularDart benefits from its dependents’ tests. But
it’s not just tests. Google is very rigorous about measuring performance
of its apps, and so most (all?) production apps have benchmark suites.

So when the AngularDart team introduces a change that makes AdWords 1%
slower to load, they know *before* landing the change. When the
team [said](https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLOU2XLYxmsILKY-A1kq4eHMcku3GMAyp2&v=8ixOkJOXdMo) in
October that AngularDart apps got 40% smaller and 10% faster since
August, they were not talking about some synthetic tiny TodoMVC example
apps. They were talking about real-life, mission-critical, production
apps with millions of users and megabytes of business logic code.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_FFPofhArfE_q-ppyTkDniA.png" title="1_FFPofhArfE_q-ppyTkDniA.png" width="600" height="270" alt="1 FFPofhArfE q ppyTkDniA" />

Side note: Hermetic build tool You may be wondering: how did this guy
know which tests in the huge internal repository to run after
introducing the flaky bug in AngularDart? Surely he wasn’t hand-picking
the 74 thousand tests, and just as surely he wasn’t running *all* the
tests at Google. The answer lies in something called Bazel.

At this scale, you can’t have a series of shell scripts to build stuff.
Things would be flaky and prohibitively slow. What you need is a
hermetic build tool.

“Hermetic” in this context is very similar to
“[pure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function)” in the context of
functions. Your build steps cannot have side effects (like temp files,
changes to PATH etc.), and they must be deterministic (same input always
leads to the same output). When that’s the case, you can run the builds
and the tests on any machine at any time and you’ll get consistent
output. You don’t need to make clean. You can therefore send your
builds/tests to build servers and parallelize them.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_sq_8UFpeBsxSIpBXpmWiSg.png" title="1_sq_8UFpeBsxSIpBXpmWiSg.png" width="446" height="284" alt="1 sq 8UFpeBsxSIpBXpmWiSg" />

Google has spent years developing such a build tool. It was open sourced
last year as [Bazel](https://bazel.build/).

And thanks to this piece of infrastructure, internal testing tools can
determine which builds/tests each change affects, and run them when
appropriate.

What does it all mean?
----------------------

AngularDart’s explicit goal is to be best-in-class in productivity,
performance and dependability for building large web applications. This
post hopefully covers the last part — dependability — and why it’s
important that mission-critical Google apps like AdWords and AdSense are
using the framework. It’s not just the team boasting about their
users — as explained above, having large internal users makes
AngularDart less likely to introduce superficial changes. It makes the
framework more dependable.

<img src="images/google-frameworks/1_BjhLEoihrMr6eRcTYL50ag-1.png" title="1_BjhLEoihrMr6eRcTYL50ag-1.png" width="598" height="232" alt="1 BjhLEoihrMr6eRcTYL50ag 1" />

If this all sounds too business-y, you could check out my
decidedly-non-business AngularDart projects like [Automatic Donald
Trump](https://filiph.github.io/markov/) (Markov chain)
or [Prime Finder](https://filiph.github.io/prime_finder/).

If you’re looking for a framework that makes major overhauls and
introduces major features every few months, AngularDart is definitely
not for you. Even if the team wanted to build the framework in such a
way, I think it’s clear from this article that they couldn’t. We
sincerely believe, though, that there is space for a framework that is
less trendy but dependable.

In my opinion, the best prediction of long-term support of an
open-source tech stack is that it’s a big part of the primary
maintainer’s business. Take Android, dagger, MySQL, or git as examples.
That’s why I’m glad that Dart finally has one preferred web framework
(AngularDart), one preferred component library ([AngularDart
Components](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/angular2_components)) and
one preferred mobile framework ([Flutter](https://flutter.io/)) — all of
which are used to build business-critical Google apps.

*\[[Matan Lurey](https://medium.com/@matanlurey) and Kathy Walrath
contributed to this article.\]*
